In this problem, we are going to consider
several instructions that we want to add to
our beta.
For each of these instructions, we will need
to decide what the minimum requirement is
to add that instruction.
The simplest addition would be a macro that
references a single already existing beta
instruction.
If our new instruction cannot be implemented
by simply defining a macro, then we want to
consider whether adding a new opcode, and
producing the appropriate control ROM signals
for it, will enable the new operation to be
executed on our existing Beta datapaths.
Finally, if neither the macro or Control ROM
solutions work, then we need to specify that
the instruction cannot be implemented without
making actual hardware changes to the Beta.
The first instruction that we want to consider
adding to our Beta is a SWAPR instruction
which swaps the contents of registers Rx and
Ry in a single clock cycle.
The constraint that this must be done in a
single clock cycle points us to the fact that
the Beta hardware does not have the ability
to write to two different registers in the
same clock cycle.
Thus, in order to add this instruction to
the Beta, new hardware would need to be added.
The next instruction that we want to consider
adding to our beta is a NEG instruction.
This instruction should take the two's complement
negation of register Rx and store it into
register Ry.
The first question we want to ask ourselves
is whether or not we might be able to implement
this using a macro.
Since all we are trying to do is produce the
negative of a given value, we can write a
macro for this instruction which subtracts
Rx from R31 and stores that result into Ry.
Note that this macro will not work for the
corner case which is the largest representable
negative number because the negation of that
number cannot be represented using 32-bit
two's complement representation.
For all other cases, however, this macro works
as expected.
The next instruction that we want to consider
adding to our Beta is a PC-relative store
instruction.
The way this instruction works is that it
writes the contents of register Rx to a location
in memory whose address is computed by adding
PC + 4 + 4*SEXT(C).
The only existing store operation in the beta
is a store that writes to the address that
is computed by adding the contents of register
Ry and the sign extended literal C.
Since this is not equivalent to the store
relative instruction's behavior that means
that we cannot implement this instruction
as a macro.
So next we consider whether or not we can
implement this instruction using our existing
Beta datapaths.
This beta diagram highlights in red the dataflow
through the existing Beta datapaths that would
perform the desired PC relative store instruction.
The way this instruction works is that the
extra adder under the instruction memory is
used to compute the value of the effective
address which is PC + 4 + 4*SEXT(C).
The ASEL, or A select signal is then set to
1 to pass that value to the ALU as the A operand.
The ALUFN is then set to A to continue passing
that value through the ALU in order for it
to be used as the address for the data memory.
This address is labeled MA, or memory address
in the beta diagram.
The value that is written to memory is the
value of register Rx.
In store operations, the first operand corresponds
to register Rc.
So we set RA2SEL = 1 in order to select Rc,
which is Rx in this case, as the register
whose contents should be written to memory.
The value of this register is made available
via the RD2 register file port which then
feeds the MWD, or memory write data signal
for the memory.
There are a couple other memory related signals
that we need to set appropriately.
They are MWR, which stands for memory write
read, and controls the write enable of the
data memory.
In order to be able to write to the memory,
the write enable must be set to 1.
MOE is the memory output enable.
We set this to 0 to specify that no output
should be enabled from the memory.
Note that you may think that MOE should be
a don't care since we are never making use
of the MRD, or memory read data, signal in
our datapath.
However, by setting it to 0 we allow ourselves
to potentially use the same databus for the
read and write data of the memory.
This is not explicitly shown in our beta diagram
but is the reason that MOE is specified as
0 for us.
The other control signal that we must set
to 0 is WERF, which stands for write enable
register file.
Setting this signal to 0 ensures that no value
will be written back into our register file.
This allows us to then set WDSEL and WASEL
to don't cares.
The last control signal is BSEL which is also
a don't care because the B operand is ignored
by the ALU for this instruction.
Finally, the PCSEL = 0 in order to increment
the PC by 4 so that the next instruction will
be fetched.
So our completed Control ROM for the STR operation
is shown here.
The last instruction we want to add to our
beta is the BITCLR(Rx, Ry, Rz) instruction.
This instruction performs a bitwise AND of
the contents of register Ry with the complement
of the contents of register Rx.
There is no existing beta instruction that
performs this functionality so using a macro
is not an option.
Next, we want to consider whether or not we
could implement this instruction using our
existing datapaths with changes to our control
ROM.
To answer this question, you need to realize
that the operation that you are trying to
perform here is a boolean operation.
In module 1, when implementing the ALU lab,
we learned that the way that the bool module
works is that if you set the ALUFN to 10abcd,
then the ALU would produce the output defined
by this truth table for every pair of bits
Bi and Ai.
So for example, to implement the AND function,
we simply set a = 1, b = 0, c = 0, and d = 0
as shown in this truth table which is the
truth table for an AND function.
The truth table for the BITCLR operation is
shown here.
One additional column, NOT(Rx)[i] has been
added to show the intermediate step of negating
Rx[i].
Then if you take the AND of the Ry[i] column
and the Not(Rx)[i] columns you get the result
Rz[i].
This means that the ALUFN for the BITCLR operation
is 10 followed by 0100.
The rest of the control signals can be determined
by looking at this highlighted beta diagram
which shows in red the paths that must be
followed in order to properly implement the
BITCLR operation.
The instruction memory specifies the registers
Ra and Rb, in our case Rx and Ry, that are
to be used by this operation.
Setting RA2SEL to 0 tells the register file
to read Rb, or Ry, as the second operand.
Then setting ASEL and BSEL to 0 passes the
values of Rx and Ry to the ALU.
The ALUFN is used to specify the particular
boolean operation that we are performing.
Then WDSEL = 1 in order to feed the results
of the ALU back to the register file.
The Rc register is Rz and it is the register
that the result should be written to.
To make that happen, we set WASEL = 0, and
WERF = 1.
To avoid anything being written to the data
memory, MWR is set to 0.
MOE can be a don't care because we are not
using the memory for reading or writing and
setting WDSEL to 1 ignores anything that is
on the MRD, or memory read data, line.
Finally, the PCSEL = 0 in order to increment
the PC by 4 so that the next instruction will
be fetched.
So our completed Control ROM for the BITCLR
operation is shown here.